[Music]
the rain
forests of sumatra
this female orangutan is 42 years old
her third child a six-year-old daughter
is still with her
oranges look after their children for
longer than any other primate
except ourselves it will take her nine
years to teach her youngster
everything she needs to know about this
complex treetop world
[Music]
she must learn how to collect ants and
termites
[Music]
how to identify at least 200 kinds of
edible plants
and how to avoid the poisonous ones
and how to judge when fruit like this
durian
has ripened to perfection
[Music]
a child must be able to judge which
branches
can carry her weight
[Music]
and which insect nests are safe to raid
building up a complete guide to the
foods of the forest
is a long process
[Music]
her lessons of course aren't limited to
food
there are other crucial skills she must
learn if she is to survive in the
treetops building
a secure nest in which to spend the
night for example
takes years of practice
and this is of course a rain forest
so all oranges must learn how to make a
shelter
early in their lives
[Music]
[Applause]
it rains almost every day so this
six-year-old
has already had plenty of practice
[Music]
she might live to be 50 years old and if
she
too becomes a mother she'll pass on all
his expertise to her own children
at a jungle hut this female finds a soul
despite being totally wild somehow
she has worked out what to do with it
like us orangutans have an opposable
thumb
that allows them to grasp and handle
objects with precision
over 20 years ago a rescue orangutan
learned how to sow by watching people
constructing the hats here
but this is a totally different and wild
orangutan
she seems to take pride in her work
even clearing away the sawdust
she's so smart she uses her feet as a
vice to steady the branch
filming a wild-born and free-living
orangutan
mastering this complex task is
remarkable
but now she's not the only orangutan
sawing
spy orangutan has joined her
it seems to be bringing out a
competitive streak
she's becoming even more enthusiastic
[Music]
but for a novice sawing is tiring work
she's lost all momentum
[Music]
then finally calls it a day
spy orangutan may have machine-like
stamina
but it's the astonishing and versatile
mind of the real
orangutan that's won the day she
certainly earned her rest
in a different part of the forest
another monitoring team
are checking that the rest of the
orangutans are feeding
[Music]
they found a nest where someone spent
the night but they can't see
who
oh ooh okay
it's menteng one of the adolescent males
they weren't expecting to meet him on
the forest floor
menteng could do them some serious
damage but he's too close for comfort
is used to getting his food from humans
they move away from him quickly
they head through thick undergrowth in
the hope he'll give
up but menteng keeps coming
the team decide to stand their ground in
the hope he'll back off
hermento it doesn't work
there's nothing for it but to head for
the safety of the river
from poland willian abandoned here
unlike leonora and emin menteng is
struggling without his regular food
deliveries
too many years on his island sanctuary
have allowed him to grow into a rather
lazy teenager
so far no one has seen him eat any
forest fruit
and rather worryingly he seems to think
the pebble beach
is made of coconuts
the team is desperate for all eight
orphans to pass the first test of
feeding themselves
menteng will be given some time he's
oblivious that
600 other rescued orangutans are relying
on him
for their freedom
that mother and baby in there are very
special to me because
we were there when they first came into
the center that's mama abbott
and when she arrived with her little
baby she was in a shocking
condition she was very close to
starvation
when she fell from the crate in front of
us it was hard to believe she was still
alive
she was ravaged by hunger wasting away
with the need to provide milk for her
baby
her forest home had been ripped up and
replaced with a palm oil plantation
where there was almost nothing to eat
it's where ninety percent of the orphans
arriving at the center
are found
[Music]
mama abut and her baby were rescued in
the nick of time
a few more days and they would have died
but loner and her team successfully
nursed them back to health
[Music]
now eight months on mama
is about to change
you must be pretty excited about all
this it's always good it's nice to get
anything
out of the project it's so lovely
how many does this leave you with at the
center roughly
exactly 600. exactly 600.
that's crazy because you just had i
think you had oh
just over 300 when i was last here so we
had 430 then
we had 635 but then we got one more in
just as we
were going to release yesterday we got
another one in so we just hit 600 again
nothing to be proud of on myself no i
know well it's just shows
rescued and confiscated orangutans
arrive at the center
faster than lona can release them but at
least this handful have a second chance
maba abut has come a long way from the
palm oil plantation where she was found
and to see her now fit and healthy and
her baby
looking 100 as well that's awesome
and now over the next couple of days
we're going to be able to see her
released back where she belongs
you can imagine the trauma all these
orangutans have been through
but with mama abbott i saw it first hand
seeing her released will bring home how
important the work of the center
really he is so clever that he can
communicate with rob
using a new language system devised
specially for orangutans
let's start with an example from the
vocabulary
this is the symbol for apple
and you'll notice that it starts with a
rectangle
on the outside or the exterior and all
food symbols
start with a rectangle you notice
there's a diagonal line
going from corner to corner and a dot
right in the center that is the only
symbol that will ever look that way
and that's the only name we'll ever have
for apple
right on cue in swings the star of the
show
i'm going to start with these okay we're
set up so you're ready to go
there you go perfect good rob uses an
intercom system to talk to az through
the glass
so what we're going to do is name this
food which is an apple
he's ready okay and he tells me when
he's ready to go he'll just give a
little
tap on the glass and he's ready for the
next question you're doing great i know
it okay let's go
now watch carefully okay i'm going to
ask him to find the name for apple on
his screen
perfect good job good goodies that was
exactly right
and for a z that's a very simple screen
at this point
he can work with screens that are
actually much more
complex and i'll go ahead and ask him to
use one of the more complicated screens
now
same food again is okay good now
i'm going to show him a very complicated
screen
good very good very good
apart from food symbols like banana
perfect days grapes crackers
now watch and carrots there you go
azy knows over 72 different words
including objects like cups excellent
well done well done
he even knows numbers and adjectives
but perhaps the most surprising language
skill
is that ez can use verbs and commands
can ask me or tell me to open something
when he uses that diamond shaped symbol
with the two lines inside
you tell me what you want me to do with
this closed container okay
open all right good that was actually a
very good choice
because there's a little something in
there for him
mistakes are are actually quite rare
he's
into the high 90 ready okay high 90
percent
accuracy with all the symbols that he
works with
now aids astonishing accuracy
demonstrates
not just a strong grasp of syntax and
vocabulary
but a razor-sharp long-term memory
[Music]
[Applause]
foreign